about 70% of the land in the lower 48
states is owned by private individuals
and we believe that the fate of the
environment really depends on the
quality of the decisions made by the men
and women who own and operate that land
my name is Dave white I'm the chief of
the Natural Resources Conservation
Service NRCS is a USDA agency we have
about 2900 field offices and we have
people all over the country that are
agronomist biologists engineers this is
working lands for wildlife lesser
prairie chicken initiative and these
technical people work one-on-one with
producers to solve natural resource
problems maybe spread the maps out over
here my name is Roy Bailey and I'm a
rancher here in Comanche County Kansas
this photo here is probably taking early
1900s
my great-great-grandfather and he pomp
stated here in the started this place
and I'm fifth generation and hopefully
keep continuing on down the line with my
children love the outdoors and solitude
and raising cow calf taking care of them
has just kind of always been a part of
our lifestyle the prairie chicken is a
fun bird to watch in the early spring
when they do their mating ritual
yeah there's always been prairie
chickens around I think their numbers
have declined
the lesser prairie chicken is a native
game bird of the southern Great Plains
of the United States I'm Christian Hagen
and I'm the science advisor to the
lesser prairie chicken initiative for
the NRCS
this bird once occupied vast areas of a
five-state region since European
settlement that range has been largely
contracted by about 90% because of that
contraction we've actually seen that
species listed as a candidate for
protection under the Endangered Species
Act so this is the Eastern redcedar
historically large herds of bison and
periodic fire kept this tree at bay this
tree is now occurring in areas large
enough that it's actually displacing or
removing habitat for native species like
the lesser prairie chicken so as simple
and funny as it sounds
prairie chickens are Prairie species and
so plants like a cedar tree represent a
habitat that the bird will simply not
use but even at lower densities what
this does is it actually provides
predators things like the coyote and the
hawk it provides them an extra advantage
and may actually increase the predation
rates on the prairie chicken
so the wonderful thing that happens when
you remove these trees as we're really
returning the Prairie to its historic
condition freezing the chickens don't
get along very good and the Cedars they
also use groundwater that take away from
grass production they're just not enough
grass for the livestock operation
the cedar here was about ten years old
mechanical clearings about the only way
to to get on top of something like this
these people have to make money off the
off the cattle ranching business on
dusty Tahoe rangeland management
specialist with Natural Resources
Conservation Service in south-central
Kansas
all right so that's the north contract
we help landowners by providing them a
prescribed grazing plan program and
includes financial assistance in brush
clearing as well as grazing incentive
payments and I mean in chickens are all
pilots through this Arian we know
there's chickens here on this ranch we
hope to increase their numbers and
hopefully royal royal see that happening
hopefully also he'll see that the
rotational grazing program will I often
benefits in the ranching business as
well
I don't see these as restrictions I
believe that a guy needs to should take
care of his operation regardless the
involvement of NRCS main major goal is
to just to be profitable what the Fish
and Wildlife Service has done is as they
said if a farmer Rancher works with us
develops a conservation plan implements
those conservation practices they will
give them certainty from regulation for
up to 30 years we've taken the fear out
of the Endangered Species Act and not
just for today or tomorrow but for a
generation for 30 years it's not about a
bird or a turtle this is about changing
the whole paradigm of how we deal with
the Endangered Species Act in America
you can get a left-winger the right I
think all species are important to
protect they're also important to
protect their habitats my name is Holly
Nita Ryder I'm a wildlife biologist with
the Delaware Division of Fish and
Wildlife in the natural heritage and
endangered species program this is like
the perfect nesting spot for a turtle
the main thing we're trying to do is
protect bog Turtles the bog Turtles our
smallest turtle in North America it's
about the size of the palm of your hand
as an adult it's the color of the mud in
which it lives so far what we found is
that turtles aren't doing well in
Delaware we've really done an aggressive
search for new habitats and we found new
habitats but we're not finding turtles
in any of those sites so that's really
disappointing turtles today we don't
know exactly what happened to those
populations but what's happened around
those is there's been a lot of
development when you put in something
like a whole housing development that
changes the hydrology of the whole area
and if it doesn't actually fill the
wetland itself it can end up just
pulling the water away from it
there are definitely some landowners who
really don't want endangered species on
their property there is a lot of fear
surrounding the Endangered Species Act
and that's one of the things we wanted
to overcome with that to change it from
confrontation to collaboration so if we
control the vegetation here what I'm
hoping is that we can get more of the
open canopy areas where the turtles can
nest and hopefully have a higher
reproduction if the producer does
everything they can to protect a boxer
we are not going to come in and require
you to do anything more so that producer
knows there's nobody gonna mess with
them they have this certainty that
they've done what they needed to do we
found a way that brings people together
we can give good value to the taxpayer
we can save these species we can make
sure that our farmers and ranchers
economically survive and we can do it in
harmony with a quality environment